---
layout: post
title: Goodbye, Google
date: '2008-04-30T02:53:53-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110242896341/goodbye-google
---
Break out the champagne, I just cashed my first $48 in [Google](http://www.google.com/) Adsense income. Normally, Google doesn’t issue a check until the outstanding balance reaches $100, but it turns out that the quickest way to get the money is to quit - the Terms of Service state that when an account is terminated, they will send you the balance within 90 days as long as it’s over $10. (I got my check in 3-4 weeks) The hardest part was sending them a cancellation notice - the Terms of Service state that the notice should be sent to the Adsense support email address, which responds with a “Did you check the Help Center web page?”, which directs you to an Adsense support web page, which doesn’t list account cancellation as a category, so you pick “Other”, which gets you an email from the Adsense support email address asking you if you really want to cancel. Why did I give up on Adsense? <!--more-->Well, watching my income accumulate was like watching grass grow, I wanted my forty-eight dollars, the ads didn’t look great on my web site (and once in a while they looked awful - my column of ads was sometimes replaced with a tall animated graphic), but the clincher was the recently updated Terms of Service presented upon a recent login (pretty annoying that you had to agree to it just to log back into an existing account so you could check your balance). The changes weren’t identified, so I don’t know if the section that bothered me was new, but here it is, the Indemnification clause:

> 14. **Your Obligation to Indemnify.** You agree to indemnify, defend and hold Google, its agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, directors, officers, employees, and applicable third parties (e.g. relevant advertisers, syndication partners, licensors, licensees, consultants and contractors) (collectively “**_Indemnified Person(s)_**”) harmless from and against any and all third party claims, liability, loss, and expense (including damage awards, settlement amounts, and reasonable legal fees), brought against any Indemnified Person(s), arising out of, related to or which may arise from Your use of the Program, the Property(ies), and/or Your breach of any term of this Agreement.

It’s hard to find a contract without an indemnification clause, but the problem here is its coverage. You agree to indemnify a whole bunch of people (not just Google the corporation) for anything “related to” your use of Adsense, not just breach of the Agreement. I have a similar problem with [Epinions](http://www.epinions.com/):

> **Indemnity.** By choosing to use the Shopping.com Network, you agree to indemnify Shopping.com, its officers, agents, partners, and employees from any and all claims or damage, including reasonable attorney’s fees, made by third parties due to, or arising out of Content you choose to submit, post or transmit through the Shopping.com Network; or of your use of or connection to the Shopping.com Network; your violation of the User Agreement; or, your violation of any rights of another.

Indemnification is not restricted to violations of the User Agreement - the clause includes claims and damages arising out of any Content you post or even just of your “use” of the site.[Dreamhost](http://www.dreamhost.com/) is a bit better.

> Customer agrees that it shall defend, indemnify, save and hold DreamHost Web Hosting harmless from any and all demands, liabilities, losses, costs and claims, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, (“Liabilities”) asserted against DreamHost Web Hosting, its agents, its customers, servants officers and employees, that may arise or result from any service provided or performed or agreed to be performed or any product sold by Customer,its agents, employees or assigns. Customer agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless DreamHost Web Hosting against Liabilities arising out of
> - any injury to person or property caused by any products sold or otherwise distributed in connection with DreamHost Web Hosting’s Server;
> - any material supplied by Customer infringing or allegedly infringing on the proprietary rights of a third party;
> - copyright infringement;
> - any defective product which Customer sold on DreamHost Web Hosting Serve

It is still regrettably general, specifying goods and services provided by you on your web site, but a bit more specific, listing particular cases - although it’s sloppily worded, specifying “Customer” in half of the cases and not the others. (it reminds me of some high school papers that I wrote half an hour before turning in, populated with incomplete sentences)[Goodreads](http://www.goodreads.com/) is much better:

> You agree to indemnify and hold Goodreads, its subsidiaries, affiliates, officers, agents, and other partners and employees, harmless from any loss, liability, claim, or demand, including reasonable attorney’s fees, made by any third party due to or arising out of your use of the Service in violation of this Agreement and/or arising from a breach of these Terms & Conditions and/or any breach of your representations and warranties set forth above.

This indemnification clause only puts you on the spot for misrepresentation and violation of the user agreement. Contracts created between equals often have mutual indemnification clauses, which looks pretty weird when the coverage is written broadly - it seems to me if both parties agree to indemnify each other for just about anything, the intent is effectively neutered. But, hey, I’m not a lawyer. Speaking of, I once objected to an indemnification clause when negotiating a contract with the corporate lawyer for a Bay Area startup. She assured me that “indemnify” did not imply any financial liability - when I demurred, she opened her pocket dictionary and then conceded the point. The lesson? With in-house lawyers, you don’t always get the cream of the crop. And keep a dictionary handy.
