---
layout: post
title: New York, the Friendliest City?
date: '2008-10-10T02:53:22-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110242915496/new-york-the-friendliest-city
---
The other night I saw [Sarah Vowell on the Daily Show](http://www.thedailyshow.com/full-episodes/index.jhtml?episodeId=187567) complain about non-New Yorkers who complain about New York and call New Yorkers snobs. But then she said she came from a crappy place similar to Sarah Palin’s origins and as a result of the American Dream came to New York. The American Dream is to go to New York? And she wonders why New Yorkers are considered snobs?

But then she also said New Yorkers could not be “friendlier or lovelier.” Now, I’ve met some very friendly New Yorkers, but on every visit to that city I’ve seen residents there in verbal confrontation. I have many college classmates and coworkers from that area who have stories of traffic encounters where someone brandished a baseball bat or threw a punch. In some stores there I’ve had someone follow me around or getting in my face “you gonna buy something?” and getting pissed at “just looking”. One Christmas midnight after a cross-country flight, I crossed some yellow tape in Penn Station following the&nbsp; signs to my train and a police officer stopped and harangued me while vagrants and poshly-dressed women wandered through the prohibited area. He finished by yelling at me to turn back, then yelled at me to continue through. Merry Christmas, buddy.

So while perhaps New York might be the most unrepressed city (compared to Los Angeles where people smile all the time and then engage in gunplay on the freeway), I’d only consider it remarkably friendly next to, say, Boston, where I found people to be friendly if you let them complain incessantly. (I still feel badly for a Southern tourist I saw riding public transportation there trying to engage fellow riders in conversation - stone cold response). And yet Ms. Vowell’s opinion seems representative of New Yorkers - I recently read a magazine article by a New Yorker exalting the congeniality of his city. And yet most of the New Yorkers and ex-New Yorkers I know like to talk about how tough they are since they’re from New York (I’m from Queens, I’m from the Bronx, I’m from Chinatown…) What, no contradiction?

If I had to pick a friendly city from personal experience, it’s tempting to pick Dallas, where I first worked after college. Straight from Boston, it was weird to encounter supermarket cashiers casually engaging in conversation, and it was a tough transition when I moved back to Boston. But I’d have to go with my high school years in Iowa City, where you could cross the street anywhere and cars would stop with no complaint, drivers would stop to give strangers a ride without it being creepy, and homeowners left their doors unlocked (admittedly leading to a rise in burglaries during the holidays). And outside of Iowa City, en route to my tenth year high school reunion, when at a truck stop I mistakenly ordered just hash browns instead of corned beef hash, the waitress must have thought I was a poor foreign student and served me a heaping plate of hash browns for $.99. Now, that’s friendly.

