---
layout: post
title: Big Brother Vista
date: '2008-09-12T03:03:12-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110242913546/big-brother-vista
---
Normally, my sleep is first disturbed by my cat pawing at my head at five in the morning, but as a nice change of pace, I awoke recently at 3AM to the sound of my new PC rebooting. I ran into my home office just to make sure it wasn’t a burglar mimicing the Windows restart chime, and there it was, my LCD screen glowing in the dark displaying a message that it was “reconfiguring”. (Is that you, [Colossus](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0064177/)?) Turns out it was just Big Brother Vista deciding I couldn’t be trusted to download and install updates myself, so it did it for me. Reminds me of the IT guy who went around and, first, installed and activated virus scanning software without telling anyone on everyone’s PC even though it posed potential problems with our game development software, and worse, rebooted all the machines, including my eight-hour FMV-conversion batch process. At crunch time. Thanks. But I didn’t blame him, I blamed my boss for telling him to do it. And I don’t blame my PC, I blame Microsoft. To be fair, or equally unfair, Apple does this too. I wasn’t happy to see one of my Macs rebooting before my eyes after an upgrade to Tiger. And it’s not just the rebooting - I do contract work on client VPN’s, and I don’t think they’d appreciate my computers downloading updates and service packs in the background over their network, nor do I appreciate my really important downloads slowing down because the latest Windows Defender update is coming down the pipe. But it’s easy to tun this off on a Mac - uncheck a checkbox in the Software Update panel of System Preferences. On my PC, it’s almost as simple to turn off the automatic update in the Windows Update window, if you know to look there (and you won’t, if you’ve never had occasion to run updates manually). But my PC came with HP Total Care Advisor, which has its own automatic download/install and a more obtuse GUI path to the preferences that can switch it off, and finally Norton Protection Center which really has two programs, or at least two separate control panels, so I had to search through one to turn off “LiveUpdate” and then search through another to turn off the automatic virus scan (which defaulted to run at 3pm? Try compiling in Visual Studio while several thousand files are being scanned - it’s a worse experience if you have no idea what’s going on) So it’s not just Microsoft - there’s a triumvirate of HP, Symantec and Microsoft to blame, here. Bad GUI’s for patronizingly overprotective software configurations band-aided over a notoriously insecure brand of OS would be more tolerable if the reboot process had a working cancel button, but apparently when it starts, it’s the point of no return, as recorded in this[video and blog.](http://blogs.zdnet.com/Berlind/?p=698)A forced reboot would be more entertaining if the PC spoke in the voice of [HAL 9000](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HAL_9000). The following [exchange from 2001](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0062622/quotes) would not be out of place

> HAL: I’m sorry Dave, I’m afraid I can’t do that. Dave Bowman: What’s the problem? HAL: I think you know what the problem is just as well as I do. Dave Bowman: What are you talking about, HAL? HAL: This mission is too important for me to allow you to jeopardize it. Dave Bowman: I don’t know what you’re talking about, HAL? HAL: I know you and Frank were planning to disconnect me, and I’m afraid that’s something I cannot allow to happen. Dave Bowman: Where the hell’d you get that idea, HAL?

In the movies, even bombs have an off switch, or at least the sophisticated ones. Vista reboots are more like “cut the red wire” situations, except of course all the wires are bad ones. But whether or not you can cancel one of these restarts, at least provide some notification (just like I complained to my boss about the IT guy reconfiguring my PC - how about some planning ahead and communication? Or maybe I just thought that while I fumed silently). After turning off Vista automatic updates, there’s an angry red splotch on my System Tray that periodically inflames and tells me that I’ve made a terrible mistake in turning it off. (Perhaps I should get a restraining order before it starts harassing my other programs). If Windows Update had just given me a little quality communication, we might have had a better relationship.
