---
layout: post
title: The Atlantic Monthly Disappoints
date: '2008-09-13T19:34:18-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110242913671/the-atlantic-monthly-disappoints
---
In [Mad Men](http://www.amctv.com/originals/madmen/), [Matt Weiner’s](http://www.avclub.com/content/interview/mad_men_creator_matthew) portrayal of the fifties as a golden age of marketing and mysogyny, all the ad writers want to write for the [Atlantic Monthly](http://theatlantic.com/) and everyone reads it.

But after redeeming some credit card reward points for a subscription, I’m a bit disappointed in the quality of the first issue I received. [Distracting Miss Daisy](http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/200807/traffic) echoes an NPR interview I heard a few months back (I’m guessing it’s the same guy) in proposing that traffic safety in the US would be improved by replacing intersections with rotaries and removing some stop signs. Some of the article’s claims make sense - two-way stop intersections are certainly more confusing than four-way. But much of it just sounds wrong. The author claims that traffic signs have dangerously trained drivers to look for stop signs and speed limit signs instead of watching the road appears. What’s the last speed-limit sign you remember seeing? And I can guarantee you, at the nearby intersection where I nearly get hit by right-turning cars every time I cross on the walk signal, drivers are not looking at any signs or pedestrians on their left or right. If you want to blame a distraction, start with the cell phones glued to their ears, the radio they’re fiddling with, or the passengers they’re gabbing to. And rotaries? The author claims studies show that rotaries have significantly decreased accidents after replacing intersections, but I’d like to know some details like how many cases are in that study, what kind of intersections were replaced, and what volume of traffic was handled before and after. I’ve seen heavily used rotaries in Boston and DC, and in lower-traffic areas like Bend and nearby PCH in Long Beach, and I’ve never heard anyone say, wow this rotary was a great idea. Instead, I see a lot of scared-looking drivers wizzing around them on a good day and on a bad day, (in Boston on my way to and from work, that would be twice a day) a four-way traffic jam.

[Is Google Making Us Stupid?](http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/200807/google) revolves around an easy grumpy-old-intellectual complaint - the Internet is shortening our attention spans and making us shallow, in particular reducing our ability to read long texts and contemplate. The article does make an interesting point that a medium can alter how we process information, but otherwise I think the author is out to lunch. My local Barnes and Noble is crammed with people on Friday night, and my neighbors give me huge stacks of pulp novels that seem to grow longer with each sequel. In fact, it is the short story market that has suffered in recent decades (and I haven’t seen Readers Digest on the supermarket checkout stands for a while). And while I don’t like reading long passages of text on the web, that’s because it’s still not as comfortable on the eyes and in a lying-on-the-sofa sense as reading a book or magazine. That’s the accepted wisdom on why e-books haven’t taken off and the impetus behind researching electronic ink and paper-flexible display technologies.

But if the author is serious about pointing out that kind of danger from a technology, again, let’s look at cell phones. It’s not just shortened attention span, it’s some addictive and irrational desire to be connected and talking to someone all the time. I’m tempted to leap into political incorrectness by citing young women who always seem to be gabbing to their boyfriends on the phone, but the ones that drive me crazy are SUV drivers who have to start talking on the phone as soon as they start up their car and begin driving in the supermarket parking lot and the men who engage in long calls while using the public restroom (do women do that?) I always have the urge to disrupt those calls by flushing repeatedly.

And if you look at software development forums, while one problem is that people don’t read thoroughly (my favorite posting - “Can someone summarize this article for me? I don’t have time to read it.”), the more common complaint among those answering questions is that the questioner didn’t bother to Google for the answer first (hence the now-annoying advice, “Google is your friend”, which seems to have replaced RTFM). Before Google, or more accurately, before the Internet, hardly anyone knew anything. At my parent’s house, no one complained that the shelves full of Encyclopedia Brittanica impeded anyone’s intellectual development, even though those articles are hardly in-depth.

If anything has decreased in quality due to the Internet, it’s more obviously the quality of print newspapers and magazines. The Economist is still great, but in comparison Time and Newsweek seem obviously diminished, the Wall Street Journal has lost its lustre after the Murdoch acquisition. And at least these articles of the Atlantic Monthly have descended into Wired (or dare I say it, blog) style writing. The Google-danger article’s ramble on the Internet threatening to replace our brains with an artificial one is just a stretch of oh-gosh writing, and commenting that online marketing has a vested interest in turning us into idiots, well, that’s nothing new - I refer you back to television, the reigning champ of dumb-down technologies, and watch Mad Men.

