---
layout: post
title: The Network Defect
date: '2009-09-10T03:47:43-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110318382821/the-network-defect
---
I was relieved to see the second issue of the [IGDA](http://igda.org/) newsletter in its new format (big PDF with articles and ads vs. old plain-text list of announcements) was a lot more interesting than the first issue, which ranged from the moderately useful (a legal column basically saying every deal is different so consult a lawyer) to what-is-this-doing-here (a financial management firm decrying the Keynesian meddling of the government - would that be the meddling including or after the Wall Street bailout? - and saying contact us. Is this an ad?) If the newsletter is going to include political op-eds, I’d like to see something that doesn’t seem to assume the IGDA is filled with high-net worth individuals, which I suppose could apply to some studio owners. But it seems to me discussion of health care would be a lot more useful to the rank and file, especially the many game development freelancers out there.

This second issue had another legal column, written by the same author as in the previous issue, but on a subject less covered - how to leave a company to start a new one without getting into trouble. I’ve had friends who got sued when they left to join a new company and a boss who would tell employees “I own all your ideas”, so this is a subject that deserves more discussion.

Still, there was one article I didn’t warm up to in this issue, and that’s the one on networking, which started out describing how the term was repurposed by recruiters from the IT field. I don’t know for a fact that it’s not true, but I have trouble envisioning a bunch of recruiters reading IT magazines and deciding hey, that technical term describes what we do! The last time I let a recruiter touch my resume, he scrambled it so badly the interviewer just looked at it in confusion until I gave him the original.

And then there was the point of the article, that IGDA members should network to find people who can help them. Of course, that’s a selling point of the IGDA, but it promotes a simplistic and distasteful conception of networking - to just go out and get free help. You know what I mean - the friend who only calls if he needs a new job or wants help moving to another apartment. Or, speaking of recruiters, the recruiters who want to make a commission off you or friends you recommend but have the attention span and social skills of gnats (in my experience, if you bother to decline politely, they will reciprocate with nothing, and they have even told me that without followup calls they’ll forget an applicant in two weeks). On one of the gamedev forums I frequent, someone who routinely criticizes others’ work asked anyone to create a free character model for him, as he was too busy. This really puts the “tragedy” in the tragedy of the commons. The result - people who contribute will leave for a forum that’s a better use of their time. Perhaps “networking” by now is an overused term (kept alive by the buzz of “social networking”) that smacks of schmoozing - what’s missing is the emphasis on community. Contribute, collaborate, learn.

