---
layout: post
title: Open Source in Games
date: '2009-04-19T17:00:21-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110318348456/open-source-in-games
---
There’s a lot of quality free legal advice for game development now, in books like the Business and Legal Primer for Game Development and in forums and columns as on the IGDA and Gamasutra web sites. But every reference I’ve seen in these articles to open source basically say watch out for open source when you license a game engine. I see a lot of problems with this advice:

- It seems to equate open source licenses with the GPL, which requires the including application to also be licensed under the GPL. If everything you know about open source is from Business Week interviews with Richard Stallman and Linus Torvalds, then you might get that impression. But most open source licenses are much less restrictive (some just require you to maintain the original copyright in the source code if you happen to distribute the source). And companies that offer code under the GPL often offer an alternative commercial license.
- It is divorced from reality. Everyone uses open source libraries, now. A quick survey of my PC, which has Crysis, Second Life, There, and a few Torque and Unity demos, shows DLL’s for the open source libraries Speex, Freeimage, OpenSSL, zlib, libjpeg, among others. And those are just the externally linked libraries - who knows how many other open source libraries were statically linked at build time. It makes no business sense to try writing every single line of code for ever-increasing features from scratch (that would take forever) or even licensing commercial libraries when the open source versions are essentially the industry standard. This isn’t just true for the game industry. I don’t think I’ve ever worked on a commercial product that did not use an open source library. Even the MacOSX is installed with a number of open source packages (OpenAL, Python, …)
- It ignores the larger issue. Sure, if you license or buy a game engine you should watch out for licenses like GPL that would impede your use of it. But that holds true for any third-party code included with the product, including commercial ones. Especially commercial ones. At least open source licenses are standardized and easily referenced (see the [Open Source Foundation](http://opensource.org/licenses/)). How are you going to find out exactly what sublicensing agreements the vendor has for all it’s third-party components? And for those third-party components that cannot be sublicensed to you, what’s it going to cost you to license them on your own? I see my copy of Lego Digital Designer uses PhysX - that’s not open source,&nbsp; but it’s free (at the moment). But other game middleware can be quite expensive (often the price is not listed - you have to ask for a quote), and sometimes the original vendor is long gone. From a risk management viewpoint, open source is a winner.
It’s a bit of an over-generalization to say open source is your friend, but to advise against it is, well, so eighties, dude. The debate is over. Any advice about open source now should be regarding which specific licenses to use ([Open Source Licensing](http://rosenlaw.com/oslbook.htm) is an excellent guide) and which open source packages are useful.
