---
layout: post
title: The not-so-glamorous world of game development
date: '2009-10-13T05:11:53-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110318393381/the-not-so-glamorous-world-of-game-development
---
_Review of_

# Game Development and Production
_Written on Epinions, May 2003:_In the last few years, I’ve been involved in the video game industry as a programmer and consultant. Occasionally, someone outside the industry will ask me, “How do you make a computer game?” Now, instead of of brushing them off with a terse “It’s really complicated”, I can say, “Read this 400-page book.” The dirty not-so-secret of the video game business is that even people in the industry don’t really know how to make games. Software development is already a messy business - throw in art and audio production, game designers, artists, motion capture, game publishers, comic book and movie licenses, the latest 3D graphics cards and console hardware, and you have a recipe for anarchy. That’s where the real value of this book comes in. The author Erik Bethke has worked on several PC games and is now the CEO of a game development company. His previous projects have been moderately, but not spectacularly, successful, so he brings a perspective of what has worked and not worked in game projects. (By that criterion, I have a lot of potential books in me!) As someone who has come into the game development business after working in other software industries, I am pleasantly surprised at the great attention paid in this book to project scheduling, technical design documentation, test planning, and defect tracking. The game industry has a notorious reputation for cowboy programming, capricious management and “death march” projects, but Mr. Bethke takes a pragmatic engineering approach, starting by framing the business context of a game project, emphasizing the need for planning, effective team organization and risk management. As he points out, there are some well-known blockbuster games that have run years over schedule and millions of dollars over budget, but most game development companies cannot survive these “successes”. Consequently, Mr. Bethke offers detailed project management techniques and explains the use of the Unified Modelling Language, a software industry standard notation for design. I don’t agree with all of Mr. Bethke’s practices, e.g. daily journals for each team member and “time-boxing”, scheduling a task by listing the latest possible completion date, but these are new ideas to me and I’m glad to have them in my toolkit, now. The book is devoted largely to the software engineering management aspects of game development, but, as one section is entitled, “Game Development is Software Development”, and everyone involved in a game project should acquaint themselves with this material. There is also some material on production planning, outsourcing, staffing, personnel management, and finding legal resources, so this book could also be described as How to Run a Video Game Company. I especially appreciate the real-world examples of design documents, “high concept” descriptions, and profiles of existing developers. If there is any caveat, it’s that this book is oriented toward those in an independent game development company, and, specifically, a PC game developer. A game producer working for a publisher may spend less attention on the development details and more on licensing, outsourcing, budgeting and marketing. Console game projects involve different technical constraints and a complex licensing and submission process with the console maker. Handheld and wireless game projects have a completely different time and resource scale and even stricter technical constraints. And multiplayer games are a whole other ball of wax, with server development and operation almost another domain in itself. The author does mention these issues, but there’s no substitute for trial-by-fire experience. Perhaps a follow-on book would be a compilation of experiences and techniques from principals in all areas of the game industry. Until then, this book provides by far the most pragmatic and comprehensive advice I’ve seen on running, and surviving, a game project.
