---
layout: post
title: Where Are the Women?
date: '2010-05-04T17:50:24-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110411923046/where-are-the-women
---
In [A Long Way to Go](http://www.wonderlandblog.com/wonderland/2010/04/a-long-way-to-go-.html), Alice Taylor laments the lack of women listed in Gamasutra’s [The Game Developer 50](http://www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/4323/the_game_developer_50.php), provides a number of women who could have been included, and suggests splitting the format into 25 men and 25 women. That last idea is an example of going a step too far (although featuring a Top 50 Women list is not a bad idea - then we can debate whether any of them should be in the global Top 50). But it shouldn’t detract from the basic point. Why no women?

To find out why, you really just need to look at the responses, particularly from Gamasutra. We-profile-women-in-other-features is like saying we gave a woman director an Oscar, so everything’s fine in Hollywood. And the defense that those honored were selected specifically for accomplishments last year sounds like a last-minute defense picked out of the air - the inclusion of Jason Della Rocca is essentially a lifetime achievement award (unless they’re rewarding him for stepping down) And then there’s the usual capper - we-work-with-a-lot-of-women-so-we’re-clearly-not-prejudiced. That’s like saying “I’m not prejudiced, some of my best friends are…”

The only way to solve the problem is to admit the problem. Here, I’ll start - when I first read the list on Gamasutra, I didn’t notice that it included no women until I saw Alice’s blog. I’m a guy in a male-dominated industry, I hang out with other guys in the industry, and I’m influenced (programmed, really), by the media (those in the media, you can’t say you’re having a cultural impact and then say you’re not, when it’s convenient). So call me a sexist, I won’t deny it. But I recognize the problem. Put the shoe on the other foot. While I may not be alert as I should be to the ill-representation of women, as an Asian-American, it’s maddening for me to see TV California towns with just one Asian, or a white-populated San Francisco, or Hawaii shows where the leads are all white, or even a sci-fi series set in a future where everyone speaks Chinese but no one is actually Chinese. This happens not because of a lack of talent or we-don’t-have-the-right-role-for-that-type-of-person - it happens because the people in that industry from the top to the bottom will by default select people like themselves, whether it’s scriptwriting, casting, or greenlighting.

I’ll close with one more recent example. Last year I watched the Huntington Beach centennial documentary on HBTV, which was a real snoozer until they unexpectedly waded into serious waters and described the [Japanese-American internment](http://www.asianamericanmedia.org/jainternment/) of WWII as a “difficult question” of their loyalties “that could not be answered” and only described them as “Japanese residents”, not mentioning that everyone of Japanese descent on the west coast was interned. When I complained to city hall, the response I got was that a “diverse” panel had approved it, and the CD’s had been sent to the local schools! (I can only hope they slept through it). I thought maybe I overreacted, saw it a second time, thought it was even worse than I initially realized, sent another complaint and this time they said they’d ask a Japanese-American member of the Orange County Human Relations Commission to look at it. Six or seven months later, they finally stopped showing the piece and distributing the DVD’s. I would have preferred that they acknowledged the inadequacy of that segment and just included some additional info with the piece directing viewers to resources such as the [Japanese American National Museum](http://www.janm.org/). But I understand the desire to cover up an embarrassing mistake. Still, I would have appreciated a “Our bad, thanks for pointing it out”, or even better, taking the issue more seriously the first time and doing a little research and introspection.

