---
layout: post
title: Best Western, Here I Come
date: '2011-01-05T23:16:20-08:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110411999366/best-western-here-i-come
---
I used to be a loyal Marriott customer, member of their rewards program, and for years, I stayed almost exclusively at Marriott hotels. Then someone called me in the evening pushing a Marriott vacation package (I think it’s one of those time-share deals). It’s one of those calls where after ascertaining your identity the caller plunges on into a long spiel without the courtesy of checking if you have the time or if you’re even remotely interested. So I haven’t been to a Marriott since (although their telemarketing department promised not to call me anymore - they actually have a telemarketing department called “Telemarketing Department”!) Same thing just happened with Hilton - I stayed at an Embassy Suites in November and joined their HHonors program. Since then, I’ve been receiving junk email from them, despite clicking on the unsubscribe links like it’s some kind of stupid Facebook game. After checking my HHonors account to verify all my settings are “Do Not Send”, I sent a complaint to customer service, saying if I got one more email I was going to quit the program. Maybe they heard me, because a few hours later, I got a telemarketing call instead, pushing some vacation package to Las Vegas. It went something like this:

> “When was the last time you were in Las Vegas?” “I’m not interested.” “We have just a few Hilton Vacation packages left, and we’d like to offer them to our HHonors members first.” “I don’t want to discuss this. Is there any way I can avoid getting more phone calls like this?” “I can look into that. I called you because you’re in our HHonors program.” “I’ve been receiving promotional email since I joined and I don’t want any of that or any phone calls.” “Well, we called you because you’re in our HHonors program.” “Then I don’t want to be in the HHonors program anymore.” “OK.” Click.

So now I just sent a request for removal from the HHonors program. We’ll see how that goes (I can change my email, not sure what to do about the phone). And I’ll add the Hilton chain of hotels to my boycott list. I was wondering why I wasn’t in the Hilton rewards program earlier, and now I just remembered. Last time I went to the Las Vegas Hilton, I did join the program, and then spent the next several months trying to get them to stop sending me junk email. I might have fixed it by dismantling my old email address. Anyway, I lost interest in the LV Hilton after they closed The Star Trek Experience. As a Klingon might say: telemarketing has no honor.
