---
layout: post
title: The Best Defense
date: '2011-07-07T12:30:53-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110515729536/the-best-defense
---
If I was a saintly person, I would say negative reviews don’t bother me, but when I see one, particularly for a free app, my unuttered responses range include “I shouldn’t have to apologize for a free app”, “get a job and pay for an app then, you cheap bastard”, and “what have you done, lately?” (that last one more or less is from Steve Jobs, who apparently gets to defy conventional PR wisdom in dishing out snark back to customers). But it’s better to let your own customers talk for you. I’ve had a few rises to my defense in App Store reviews for [HyperBowl](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/hyperbowl/id344209253) and [Fugu Maze](http://itunes.apple.com/app/fugu-maze/id295808255) but this one from Marsha Tyszler in a review of [Fugu Bowl](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/fugubowl/id297032758) is just marvelous:

> Note: I am a customer of Technicat apps. I am in no way affiiated with the company, nor do I know the developers, their workers, or their families/friends. Not sure why people around the app store resort to blaming positive reviews on supposed associations, but I just want to make that perfectly clear for those of you who are about to make this sort of accusation. Please read my review and response to other customers’ unfair reviews/ratings below! It seems that most of the people who rated this app poorly and wrote negative reviews for Fugu Bowl missed the part, written in PLAIN ENGLISH, where the developers described this app as (and I quote), “a PROTOTYPE for the control scheme used in the iPhone and iPad version of Hyperbowl … and was created with DEMO ASSETS.” I don’t mean to be rude, but it makes me mad when people review/rate an app poorly because they don’t bother to read the desciption and/or don’t understand the desciption. Some of the reviewers were upset that this game is lacking in features and claimed that there was little thought put into this app (among other unfair comments) … these people are correct in their observations, but had they read the developer’s description, then they would have been informed of the reason for this! Yes, this app is supposed to be lacking features, and the person who said there was little effort put into the app obviously has no concept about how much work it takes to program a simple prototype like Fugu Bowl, let alone an eventual finished and polished app! Allow me to explain the point of this app, Fugu Bowl. There is a reason Apple requires that developers write descriptions – and some developers write better descriptions than others. I’ve seen wonderfully detailed descriptions and horribly unclear ones. This developer, Technicat, could not have been more succint and accurate with Fugu Bowl’s Description! As Technicat wrote, this app was created as a prototype/demo, which means that they made this app as a precurser to another game they eventually wanted to develop called Hyperbowl (which has been in the app store for some time and is quite good!) The point of this app was not to have bells and whistles of most games, rather they wanted to test the core elements of the game’s inner workings, like the control scheme, game engine, iAds, etc., to test how well the basic program would work before taking the time to add the great features and graphics most of us love about games. If they would have found major or even minor problems with this demo app (ie: lagging, etc.), it would have given Technicat a chance to step back and fix those isses before spending tons of additional hours working on the rest of the eventual Hyperbowl game. It is clear that they used this method of testing before developing the whole game so as not to put a subpar, problematic app on the app store, and we should all be appreciative of this! I wish most developers would have the same development protocol – think of all those horrible apps that are sold on the app store that waste your money because they didn’t do enough pre-testing! So why was Fugu Bowl put on the App Store if it’s a prototype, you ask? I have seen a trend where some developers are putting these prototype apps on the App Store to showcase their talents and work to other developers, let their tech fans in on their development process, etc. They, themseves, said that this app is “minimalistic” and as a demo, it is supposed to be! They even asked that users check out the actual game that came to fruition from this demo – and I also suggest that you download Hyperbowl and their other games. They are fantastic! Reviewing this app on its own terms, and keeping the developer’s description in mind, this app is a wonderful showcase of Technicat’s programming skills and testing protocols! Fugu Bowl runs smoothly on both my iPad and IPhone, the bowling mechanisms are realistic and fun, and I have not encountered any oddities or glitches while playing! It’s a solid demo! As they asked, please check out Hyperbowl because it further showcases the reason Fugu Bowl was made and how they improved upon it in their final product! And do check out their other apps! If you wrote a review or rated Fugu Bowl poorly, please take a moment to reconsider changing it, bearing in mind that this is an excellent prototype/demo that plays flawlessly, and is exactly as advertised … and free! Thanks for your hard work, Technicat … I hope this review will help your current and future customers appreciate and understand your efforts! I am always loyal to developers who work hard, put out fun and well-working apps, and showcase their talents and processes by letting people see their initial demos! I hope to see new apps (and demos!) from your company in the near future! :-)

This also applies to other tech-demoish apps like the ones from Unity, that also get panned with strenuous game critiques. So now I’m feeling guilty - I pushed for Unity to release and update those apps, so I better put in some complimentary reviews. A couple of notes about Fugu Bowl - despite the low ratings, it’s my most-downloaded app (even more than the free versions of HyperBowl), and I earn almost as much on ads from Fugu Bowl as I do on sales of HyperBowl. Too bad I had it ad-less for two years! And Fugu Bowl is the game I’ve received the most feedback about in person, even though I’m always pushing HyperBowl (“I really liked your bowling game.” “HyperBowl?” “No…Fugu Bowl”) Go figure. Anyway, I’m going to update Fugu Bowl today, yep, to try out a new feature that I’d like to add to HyperBowl - some nice water rendering! &nbsp;
