---
layout: post
title: Web Surfing Like the Amish
date: '2011-05-19T12:17:30-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110412034486/web-surfing-like-the-amish
---
I found Kevin Kelley’s book [What Technology Wants](http://www.kk.org/books/what-technology-wants.php) thoroughly interesting, but a couple of sections struck home. The first was his description of the lifestyle of early hunter hominids, before they settled down and started growing food. According to Kelly, it was a somewhat idyllic lifestyle in which the hunters hung out and snoozed all day, punctuated with brief periods of furious activity. Sounds like game development to me (I can imagine a hunter complaining in a chase postmortem - “man, I hate these crunch time hunts - we really should have a process”). The downside of that lifestyle is the constant threat of starvation. Again, game development.

The second section that I found personally relevant is on - wait for it - the Amish. Apparently they’re not quite as sequestered as depicted in that Harrison Ford movie, they use the Internet, but just at facilities like the public library and not at home where it pulls you away from family and community. I can relate to this somewhat. I’m a big fan of email communication, but I don’t like any kind of instant messaging - no SMS, no chat, no IM'ing. I’d rather talk over the phone, and over that, I’d prefer to talk face-to-face (and not video chat). It’s a distraction (to me, “multitasking” only works for if you don’t actually have to concentrate on anything - I can multitask tweeting and watching TV, I can’t multitask programming and anything else).

And I’m on my second stint of no broadband at home, though this time I’m cheating a bit by using the mobile hotspot feature of my phone to keep all my other devices online. I’d describe this as half broadband - it’s fine for email and web surfing, but painful to impossible for videos (YouTube barely works, and the ABC Player on my iPad doesn’t) and for big downloads like the 4GB XCode zip file, forget about it. And I have to ration my usage - download a bunch of apps, and I’ve hit a mystery threshold that prompts T-Mobile to throttle down my 3G speed to one of the lower G’s. (I thought the limit was 2GB, but that’s if you try it in one day - I was able to go up to about 3GB without throttling over a couple of weeks, before the throttling kicked in).

I take issue with T-Mobile’s description of that plan as their “unlimited data plan” (it’s unlimited until you hit the limit), but I have to admit, it’s more unlimited than the Verizon 3G plan on my iPad. As soon as I hit the prepaid limit on my Verizon plan, the service stopped completely. Worse, when you first set up the Verizon service on the iPad, it starts a monthly automatic renewal (automatically charging your credit card), and the only way to cancel the renewal is to cancel the plan, which immediately cancels the current service. So if you don’t want the automatic renewal to kick in, and you didn’t already run out of the current month’s allocation, then you have to time the cancellation to occur before the renewal without losing too much of what you already paid for. The service agreement says you’ll get a renewal email and charge the day somewhere around the day before the current expiration date, and you can call them for a refund if you cancel between the renewal charge and the expiration date, but I just tried that, and through five transfers (two to departments that just disconnected my call) and five times of me supplying my name and account number, all I got was “we don’t refund for prepaid”. (For a moment I thought I was talking to AT&T) So, that’s $20 down the drain.

My previous stint of going out for Internet, involved copious use of Starbucks, using the T-Mobile hotspot service. I used that as an excuse to find all the Starbucks in the beach city locations here. I’m less happy with that strategy now - I don’t know if my standards have changed or if the AT&T service they use now is worse, but the download speed isn’t any better than my 3G service, and there are only so many hours you can sit in a Starbucks waiting for a download to complete. So for heavy duty downloads, like the Amish I go to my [public library](http://hbpl.org/), which has the best download performance I’ve found so far, and for $2/hr I can rent a study room if a I need an office away from the home office. And sometimes, I even read a book. The kind with paper.

