---
layout: post
title: Man Up!
date: '2011-11-15T13:07:09-08:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110515792631/man-up
---
Sometimes I see an app description containing a plea from the developer that customers refrain from posting negative reviews and contact the developer first. I’m totally sympathetic - no one wants bad reviews. But I think they should suck it up - it comes with the territory, and begging people not to please not hurt you seems so undignified. It seems to me most crappy reviewers aren’t interested in having a constructive discussion, anyway (I take what little recourse I have by rating reviews Helpful or Not Helpful - anything crass or idiotic goes in the latter category). However, I see even some companies are not above asking (or telling) you not to give them bad press. I like Dreamhost, but this statement in their [web app contest](http://blog.dreamhost.com/2010/12/07/call-for-apps/) rankled:

> If your app gets rejected, please don’t go crying to the **New York Times** , **Gizmodo** , and **anyone else that will listen**. That’s what iOS developers do and, frankly, it’s beneath you.

It was also kind of funny, considering they had not one, but two blog entries from a staffer complaining about an App Store rejection. And they have plenty of customers and positive press - no need to get all thin-skinned and prickly about it. But at least it doesn’t have the subtle threatening tone of [Apple’s edict](http://www.engadget.com/2010/09/09/apples-app-store-review-guidelines-we-dont-need-any-more-far/):

> If your app is rejected, we have a Review Board that you can appeal to. If you run to the press and trash us, it never helps.

Or perhaps I’m being paranoid. Anyway, Apple also is in no danger of running out of customer goodwill, so this seems unnecessarily petty (it reminds me of some former teachers and managers who always wanted to take issues “offline” so they didn’t look bad) And kind of hypocritical - after all Apple runs the App Store with its customer review system and doesn’t tell its customers “please don’t trash the app developers, talk to them first!” Plus, I don’t remember Steve Jobs being particularly shy about publicly expressing his opinions. So, man up!
