---
layout: post
title: Unity 3.5 iAds
date: '2012-01-04T17:38:51-08:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110515807361/unity-35-iads
---
OK, I finally decided to get my hands dirty with the Unity 3.5 developer preview. I’m disappointed that the features I most looked forward to aren’t there - the new GUI system and a GUI for version control, and there have recently been a lot of cool high-end improvements that don’t really apply to my mobile apps. However, the Flash support is impressive - I haven’t tried it out, yet, and I don’t know if I’ll get it to work (I’ll crank on it tonight and see if I can get something ready for the contest by tomorrow), but I’m surprised they got something in this soon.

And there are some features that at least should make my life easier on mobile dev. I just submitted an app to the App Store that uses the new iAd support in Unity iPhone. I’m happy with the prime31 plugin, but the more features I’m using that move from plugins to Unity proper makes things just that much simpler. And the Unity iAd API is pretty easy to use. Here’s the code I just submitted, which is basically the sample in the scripting reference for AdBannerView, sans UnityGUI:

``

function Start () {  
 GameObject.DontDestroyOnLoad(this);  
 StartCoroutine(ShowBanner());  
}

function ShowBanner() {  
 var banner:ADBannerView;  
 banner = new ADBannerView();  
 banner.autoSize = true;  
 banner.autoPosition = ADPosition.Top;  
 while (!banner.loaded && banner.error == null)  
 yield;

if (banner.error == null)  
 banner.Show();  
 else banner = null;  
}  
  
Now, I’m not a hundred percent sure this code is working until the app gets approved and I start seeing real ads, but once that’s verified, I’ll start using it on my other apps and go through the same process with the new GameCenter support.

