---
layout: post
title: I Vote for Change, in Old Media
date: '2008-11-07T22:09:46-08:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110242918051/i-vote-for-change-in-old-media
---
Late Wednesday, I thought instead of just searching for the various election results on the web or sitting through the local and national TV news hours, I’d pick up a newspaper and spend the evening reading thoughtful post-election analysis. So I walked to the nearest Starbucks for a New York Times, but they were sold out of all papers. Same with the Starbucks at the next corner. Then I went to the Ralphs supermarket, where the greeter informed me they only received seven LA Times that morning and they were all gone in minutes. For some reason, there was one Wall Street Journal sitting there, so I took that, but in the Murdoch era, their writers don’t write big stories, anymore. I ended up checking the web for [local election results](http://www.ocvote.com/live/gen2008/results.htm), anyway. The results surprised me - I guess I didn’t realize how much of a [red county](http://www.redcounty.com/orange-county/) the OC is.

I keep hearing about how print media is dying at the hands of the Internet, but it seems to me they’re not trying that hard to stay alive. On the day after the election, they couldn’t print a few more copies? Perhaps the roadside newspaper vending machines weren’t empty, but I always lose my change in those antiquated things by pulling on the door before the coins have fallen all the way. You think they have junk like that in Japan? They have vending machines there that will cook you dinner (seriously, I subsisted on microwaved fried rice from a vending machine when I was there)

Print media sales tactics are last-century, too. One reason I got rid of my land-line phone was the telemarketing calls from the LA Times and the Orange County Register (and while I was in the Bay Area, the San Francisco Chronicle). They send teenagers door-to-door pleading for assistance in their quest to attend college, if you would just sign up for a subscription. And if that doesn’t work, you can always count on Generation Whine to sigh and implore “whyyyy nooot?” like they’re negotiating raises for their allowances. Maybe that sales strategy isn’t so dumb - I’m still waiting for the LA Times subscription I paid for eight years ago. But I suspect that even though their teen sales crews disregard No Soliciting signs and sneak through gated entries, the delivery people don’t.

The day before the election, I saw well-dressed African-American teens knocking on doors around here - I thought it was a last-minute get-out-the-vote campaign from Obama supporters until one of them asked me for a “donation” to buy some magazines or books. While I browsed the tattered list of materials I could not possibly want (Christian books for parents? I’m neither), I saw the name of the company that sent them, [Mlllennium Sales,](http://www.millennium-sales.com/index.php) whose web site describes the company as “dealers for books of interest to African-Americans and Hispanics” And they sent crews to Huntington Beach, which, according to its [Wikipedia entry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huntington_Beach,_California), is one percent African-American? Maybe they’re counting on liberal white guilt (or conservative white guilt, given the local election tally). When I failed to produce my wallet, the Millenium Salesman went into a spiel about how he wasn’t born with a silver spoon in his mouth, until he saw my eyes glaze over and gave up on me.

At least he was fairly polite compared to past processions of kids in [traveling sales crews](http://www.travelingsalescrews.info/) (a seasonal event, like the Santa Ana winds) who said they were sent by some church back East and brandished subtle sales tactics like “You don’t talk to minorities?” What kind of church is that? At least I won’t mind as much when a Mormon or Jehovah’s Witness comes to my door. I don’t want anyone trying to sell me the Word of God, but it’s better than a magazine subscription.

