---
layout: post
title: HP + Siggraph = Annoying
date: '2008-09-07T00:57:20-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110242913086/hp-siggraph-annoying
---
The low point of [Siggraph 2008](http://www.siggraph.org/) for me was the HP booth. I walked by, saw the empty seats, and took one to rest my tired dogs. The guy at the microphone announced announced those who sat through the next talk and filled out a survey would be entered into a drawing for something neat (might have been one of their new [monitors developed in conjunction with Dreamworks](http://www.hp.com/hpinfo/newsroom/press/2008/080610xd.html)), and the talk would cover some kind of media sharing hardware, so I figured, why not. Then I had to listen the barker go through his shtick trying to get passersby to fill the seats, and by the time they started talking about the product, I just wanted to get out of there.

Now, I wouldn’t bother complaining about that except I got a “followup” call from HP. The caller asked if I had time, I said no, the caller said what would be a good time next week, I said, OK, just shoot. But then the caller just started asking me the same questions that I answered on the survey, some of which were oddly phrased, e.g. “What workstations do you have - Apple, Dell or HP?” When I asked how many more questions there were remaining, she finished up with “what can we do for you?” Stop calling me was the only thing that came to mind. I suppose I could have asked for free hardware. Somehow the questions went from idiotically specific to uselessly vague. Ironically, I did buy an HP workstation after Siggraph, but only after returning a competing product and doing some extra research on the web. If HP had just sent me a list of their latest products, that would have been useful.

I realize good marketing people exist, but they seem few and far between and always at some other company than my own (“why can’t we have one of those?”). I often blame this sort of desultory marketing on business schools. I have a theory, purely speculative since I don’t have an MBA, that marketing is the cop-out major. For finance, you have to have a good brain for numbers. For marketing, you just need enthusiasm.

But it’s probably unfair to blame B-schools, at least entirely - most of us have been trained in K-12 to go door-to-door guilting our neighbors into buying chocolates to fund activities they shouldn’t have to care about (I’d like to see school employees, say the principal or band teacher, walk around hocking this stuff - c'mon, show some commitment!). Apparently, schools don’t teach the meaning of “No Soliciting” (this is the best argument for gated communities)

It’s such an effective sales strategy that it’s not just the schools that do it - every year local teenagers come to my door selling subscriptions to the LA Times to fund their college education, or[traveling sales crews](http://travelingsalescrews.info/) of teens sent by their church from the East Coast selling magazines (what kind of church is that?), and in one case, a young man selling religious books listed on a crumpled piece of paper to help him attend Howard University. Teens make the best salespeople - they’ve perfected whining to an art (“Aw, please, c'monnn!” followed by a sigh)

The lesson is not only that you can sell by being obnoxious and intrusive (like all those promos and logos popping up over your favorite TV programs), but that you can and should sell crap that no one wants (the one exception is the Girl Scout mafia - those cookies are good!). In high school, somehow I ended up in a program called something like Junior Adventure where volunteers from the local Procter and Gamble taught us the essentials of business. Under their tutelage, we handmade some kind of yarn ornament mixed with potpourri and sold it in a mall. They also gave us a tour of the P&G plant where we watched a single employee on the night shift assembly line inspect bottle caps. I guess that reinforced the message that we’d better learn to sell crap if we didn’t want to end up there.

While the product may be crap, the idea can be great. I recall my high school was into **The Big Idea** (like the title of [Donny Deutch’s show](http://www.cnbc.com/id/15838512/), not **The Useful Product** , or for that matter, **The Hard Work** , **The Diligent Preparation** ,or **The Disciplined Execution** ) When it wasn’t preparing us to be 9-to-5 cogs in cubicle farms (show up on time, sit in regularly spaced assigned seats, complete your assignments, no more, no less), they’d sent the “gifted” students to “creativity” sessions where grad students from the university school of education who didn’t actually know any science regaled us with stories of how famous physicists thought up great ideas in their dreams. My favorite was the state brainstorming competition where your school’s team would compete by coming up with the wackiest idea that didn’t solve any particular problem. I think we came up with jet packs on Mars. Hmm, I should have told HP that I need one of those.

