---
layout: post
title: How I Rate
date: '2009-10-31T18:02:22-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110318400431/how-i-rate
---
Some of the App Store ratings I’ve received puzzle me. For example, there’s the person who game me a one-star rating and called my app the worst ever (that’s hard to believe - out of 85,000 apps?), but then when I checked that reviewer’s other ratings, all were just one star or five stars. A binary reviewer. Another one-star review was actually a rave review except for a complaint that I didn’t support pre-OS 3.0 - it promised an upgrade to five stars if I rectified that. (and to add insult to injury, I think both of those reviewers used promo codes - they didn’t even have to pay for it). On the other hand, I’ve been the beneficiary of five-star ratings, too, so it probably cancels out and I probably shouldn’t look too closely or obsess about it. But that has made me consider I should be more conscious about how I rate other apps. It’s not exactly a formula, but I do have some rules of thumb:

- A few apps don’t even run. Those get one star (“avoid”)
- Some apps are so obnoxious in some way that I remove them immediately. One star.
- An app with any redeeming feature gets at least two stars (“adequate”)
- An app that requires you to login to some kind of internet account just to get past the first screen is two stars.
- An app that has had decent work done on it, not slap-dash work, gets at least three stars (“OK/average”)
- An app that has repeatable playability/usability, that you want to promote, tell your friends about, gets at least four stars (“good”)
- An app that has ads will lose a star - it’s never unobtrusive, and to put it another way, ad-less apps should be rewarded. I deducted two stars from one app that had flickering ads on the screen during gameplay - the equivalent of flashing web banner ads.
- An app that is so good or useful that I try to avoid deleting it when making room for new apps gets five stars.
I’m not saying it’s a great system, but it’s a system. Maybe the biggest defect is that it doesn’t consider price - shouldn’t a great free app somehow rate higher than a great $10 app? Also, this isn’t a problem with my rating system so much as the Apple rating interface - I only bother rating apps when I delete them, so my least-favorite apps have the greatest probability of getting their ratings, while my favorite apps never get their deserved five stars. A stat I would really like to see? app-lifetime-on-device.
