---
layout: post
title: Jury Duty
date: '2010-09-13T19:15:28-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110411962896/jury-duty
---
While I was moving nearly every year I managed to avoid getting called for jury duty, but now that I seem to have settled down in Orange County, I get called to jury duty every other year, like clockwork. I never got selected as a juror, until last month. In the spectrum of civil duties, this is hardly an onerous one. You just have to sit in a jury box for a few days, take notes and hash out some decisions with a bunch of people in a room. It’s like a really long meeting. And I hate meetings, but I did learn some things:

- I don’t like spending money on lawyers, but don’t try to act as your own attorney. This defendant did, and there were times when I wanted to object.
- Orange County pays $15/day for jury service. Which compares favorably to iPhone app sales.
- Six jury members were Asian. Now, how many TV shows based in California show more than one Asian? (it’s one of my hobbies - “spot the Asian”). And all you people worried about Latinos taking over…don’t forget about us!
- It turns out taking Edinger from Huntington Beach to Santa Ana is faster than taking the 22.
- You can’t take your notes out of the courtroom. Which is too bad for the juror next to me who was drawing some really nice pictures.
- A lot of us were self-employed (considerately, the judges with long trials did not call anyone who was self-employed).
- Despite what I see on TV and the Internet, there are responsible people. Everyone on the jury did a conscientious job, and only a couple in the selection pool tried to get out of it. Compared to the last time I was called, it was a relief to see no one got confused by “do you understand the defendant is innocent until proven guilty?” and this time no one pretended not to understand English.
- Always eat a little beforehand. Ironically, a lesson I learned when I took the LSATs a long time ago and pissed off everyone else with my loudly grumbling stomach.
- Despite taking the LSATs, and a continuing interest in the law (I’m a big Scott Turow fan), I’m glad I’m not a lawyer.
