---
layout: post
title: So You Want Make an iPhone App
date: '2010-10-22T19:05:30-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110411972736/so-you-want-make-an-iphone-app
---
I’m frequently contacted about making an iPhone app. That’s good - it means I’m getting referrals, and I don’t mind doing a little research and giving a free consultation, like a lawyer (if I could just get paid like one!). But in a lot of these talks, I end up giving a tutorial on the very basics of getting into the iPhone app business, which is not a good use of time. So here are some tips on what you should figure out before you look for a contract iPhone developer:

- Go to developer.apple.com, register free as an Apple and iPhone developer, and read all their information on joining, developing, and publishing in their iPhone program.
- Check out your local big chain bookstore - there are plenty of iPhone development books out there with information about the publishing process and tips on how to market your app. Don’t start from scratch.
- Decide whether you want to publish your own apps. Don’t say yes immediately (everyone does) - think about it. Do you want to go through the paperwork of joining the program (e.g. supplying bank information). Are you going to register as an individual or a company? Have you formed the company? That takes a while, and getting a company approved by Apple takes longer than getting an individual approved, so if you’re going to do that, get that started.
- If you’re not going to publish your app, do you want the contractor to publish it, or are you going to look for another publisher? If you want to the contractor to publish, make that clear (and chances are, you’ll get a better deal - I’m definitely more flexible on partnerships where I get to publish the app under my own label than if I’m just handing it off to someone else). If you’re going to use another publisher, figure out who you’re going to use and what that entails, and what you’re going to need from the contractor, if anything.
- If you’re going to publish the app yourself, are you really going to perform the certificate generation, signing, rebuild and upload of the app yourself? If you don’t understand what I just said, the answer is probably no, which means either the contractor or another contractor is going to have to do it.
- Same question for updates. Even if you have no desire to update your app, Apple can release a new OS or hardware tomorrow that will change your mind. They can even release a new OS that will break your app. So figure out what you’re going to then and who you’re going to hire to do it.
- Figure out what you’re going to need from your contractor. I’m amazed how many people who contract out web site development only receive the final product with no ability make adjustments later on their own, e.g. no Flash source projects in a Flash-based web site. Same deal with iPhone apps. If you’re going to publish the app yourself, you’ll need the XCode project for the app. If you plan to make any changes at all in the future without the contractor, you’re going to need all the source assets and any middleware that the contractor is using.
- If there’s a server-side component to the app (news feed, online registration…) who’s going to set that up and operate it?
- Some potential clients have pointed to existing apps as references for what they want to do. That’s good. You can use that approach in searching for a contractor, too - find one who’s developed a similar app. I often end up saying “I could do this but I specialize in using the Unity game engine to create 3D apps and I charge a lot, so you could find someone else to do this better and cheaper.” I should put that on my business card.
- Be realistic. Take all the successful apps you’ve heard about, then compare to the total number of apps out there (300,000 by now?) And don’t tell me there’s a simple formula. Sell a million apps and you can tell me the rules to success on your blog. And remember that Apple reserves the right to reject any app, so don’t even assume that your app will be approved.
