---
layout: post
title: Fred Korematsu Day
date: '2010-10-13T18:50:52-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110411969481/fred-korematsu-day
---
A couple of weeks ago, Gov. Schwarzenegger designated September 23 as [Fred Korematsu](http://korematsuinstitute.org/) Day, recognizing his civil rights leadership in resisting the Japanese-American internment of World War II. Meanwhile, here at Huntington Beach public library , I picked up a copy of the [100-year Huntington Beach documentary](http://catalog.hbpl.org/ipac20/ipac.jsp?session=1287T10T80R03.408365&profile=cen&source=~!horizon&view=subscriptionsummary&uri=full=3100001~!304792~!0&ri=1&aspect=subtab15&menu=search&ipp=20&spp=20&staffonly=&term=ebb+and+flow&index=.GW&uindex=&aspect=subtab15&menu=search&ri=1) published by the local historical society, which cheerfully notes how the chili crop production dipped during the war because the Japanese-American farmers were interned, but otherwise life went on as normal. And the book profiled a local Japanese “immigrant” who was interned (failing to elaborate that citizens were also interned), quoting him as saying “it had to be” (I’d like a second opinion on that translation), noting his “associates” (his poker buddies, or everyone of Japanese descent on the west coast?) were well-treated by their neighbors (excepting perhaps the Fountain Valley residents who didn’t want a Japanese-American soldier buried near his family’s home after he’d been drafted from camp to serve and be killed in Europe) and some were even offered the option to move inland (the interment sounds like a time-share presentation). Nothing about how that whole internment thing was a really bad idea (there were some who did object - the Orange County Register, Ansel Adams, and, oh yeah, the 120,000 sent to live behind barbed wire) I had earlier complained to City Hall about the documentary they were broadcasting on local cable, but it turns out that was just a faithful rendition of this book. I just want to hear a “My bad, we didn’t know what we were talking about” but so far I’ve only heard “There’s nothing wrong with it”, “A diverse group of community leaders approved it” (have you seen the candidate roster this election? It’s blindingly white), and, horrifyingly, “It’s been sent to local schools”. Nice to know that when the next generation takes over, if there’s a war with China, I’m headed off to “camp” even though I’m an American-born citizen. I’m also descended from Muslims on my father’s side, so I’m doubly screwed (I assume those who are determined to think Pres. Obama is a Muslim would think I am, too). But gosh, I hear everyone was treated really well in those camps, so let me pack my bags!

[Of Civil Wrongs and Rights - trailer](http://vimeo.com/10392311) from [Asian Law Caucus](http://vimeo.com/user3142217) on [Vimeo](http://vimeo.com).

