---
layout: post
title: HyperBowl Will Not Be on the Mac App Store
date: '2011-03-31T21:48:06-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110412022811/hyperbowl-will-not-be-on-the-mac-app-store
---
There are developers like Trip Hawkins who complain that Apple allows too much crap on the iOS App Store, and there are developers like me (and Adobe and Google, I imagine) who complain about their arbitrary app rejections. And their are probably some developers who voice both complaints. In each of those cases, the real underlying issue is that Apple maintains a monopoly on the iOS app market. And as appropriate with a monopoly, the app review process is a bureacratic one, with guidelines that provide some useful warnings, seasoned with enough generality that they can reject you for anything, along with a side salad of patronizing about how high their standards are so that if you get rejected, you’ll know that it’s because you’re not good enough (that’s the Apple special, also carried over from NeXt). If you run into a problem, you’re not going to get Don Norman calling you on the phone to discuss fundamental user interface principles, you’re going to get a bureaucrat who politely cites clauses from the review guidelines and politely tells you what they want you to do (“it is advisable…”, “it is suggested…”). On the occasions where it seems they’re giving you a break (“we’ll let it go this time…”), you feel a Stockholm-syndrome-like gratitude, which is a relief reaction from mentally screaming “you can’t be serious” (Jim Cramer should be an app developer) and “can’t you just tell me the specific real reason?” Actually, my experience with the iOS App Store has not been that bad. I’ve had just enough app rejections to make me realize it’s much like my communications with my local government (I’ve given up trying to convince Huntington Beach City Hall that the Japanese-American internment of WWII wasn’t a good idea, contrary to their centennial documentary) and to make me wonder if I should pay another $99 to renew the privilege for another year. But it hasn’t been difficult to read between the lines, so I make an educated guess on what agenda I’m conflicting with and what they really want me to do. For example:

- [ElektraDance](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/elektra-dance/id298043398?mt=8) - when first submitted, it was in review for a few weeks, then I received an email saying they needed more time to review it, then a few weeks later a rejection for “not enough functionality”. I won’t argue it has little functionality (it’s just a mocap demo with music), but eight weeks is a long time to decide an app doesn’t have much functionality. More likely, it was the apparent nudity (I made it a silhouette, but still…) That theory seemed to have been vindicated when I resubmitted it a year later after Apple introduced a 17+ rating for apps and it got approved. Then, when I actually tried to add more functionality (selectable music), it got rejected for a trademark violation. I asked them to specify which trademark was being violated (poor trademark!) or if the real reason was because it resembled the dancing silhouette iPod ads, which is not a trademark issue, and, without admitting an error in their previous message, they said my app could not resemble Apple marketing materials (without specifying which marketing materials). I said I could turn off the silhouette and turn on the lights, but that would make the nudity more obvious - they didn’t say anything about that, but I decided it wasn’t worth risking the invested time, so ironically, the old version looking like the ads that are no longer on TV is still there.
- HyperBowl Forest - I started releasing HyperBowl lanes individually before I knew I had enough to combine in a “full” [HyperBowl](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/hyperbowl/id344209253?mt=8) app and figured that would also allow me to sell individual lanes at $.99 to people who only wanted certain ones, while charging more than $.99 for the full game. HyperBowl Forest was the fourth lane and prompted a call from Apple asking about my strategy and then complaining that I was charging for “leveling up”. I failed to convince him otherwise, but after telling me that I should make the full game free and charge for all the lanes in it using in-app purchases and accomodate existing customers by implementing some sort of credit system so they could redownload the lanes without paying…he said they’d let it go this time since I only had six lanes total. I decided to just forget it and made the first three lanes free with no more plans for updates so I wouldn’t have to deal with this again. I rationalized this would make some lanes available for those were stuck on OS 3.0 for whatever reason while I updated the main HyperBowl game to new OS’s. (So far, this has garnered me a one-star review complaining that I was increasing the OS requirements on the paid app…why I oughta….)
- La Petite Baguette and Gamasutra News - I submitted these AppMakr-based apps after two other [AppMakr](http://appmakr.com/) apps, [Blue Mars News](http://itunes.apple.com/app/blue-mars-news/id403084728?mt=8) and [Unity Feed,](http://itunes.apple.com/app/unity-feed/id400855804?mt=8) got approved, but La Petite Baguette, which shows the soup of the day, tweets and menu from my favorite local French sandwich shop, and Gamasutra News, a collection of Gamasutra RSS feeds, were rejected, the former for being too promotional, and the latter for being a collection of web feeds. Although the rejection criteria were different, in both cases they said they’d approve it if I added native functionality, specifically mapping capability, and otherwise, I should consider making a web app (I didn’t get the impression that they realized the difference between a simple web site and what’s involved in combining feeds from various sources). I responded that I didn’t have that flexibility since I used AppMakr, and were they rejecting everything implemented with AppMakr? No response, but I interpret that as saying “we’ll let it go as long as you tie the app to our platform”. I don’t mind the loss of the Gamasutra, since I noticed later it crashes easily for some reason, but I like the soup-and-sandwich app - I check it almost daily to plan my lunch and it would have been nice to make it available their other customers.
So far, the iOS app rejections and warnings have been just minor inconveniences (though the loss of the soup-and-sandwich app rankles) and haven’t affected my games, in particular HyperBowl, which is my main effort. However, the Mac App Store is a different story. On the iOS App Store, I started submitting simple apps while developing a desktop/web version of HyperBowl and then crunching that down into an iOS App. For the Mac App Store, I started immediately with HyperBowl, which was already running on the desktop, but I spent another two months getting it ready for the Mac App Store (adding a more polished pause menu via [GUIKit](http://gameassets.net/), a background so I could display it in 800x600…) But then it was in the review queue so long I was wondering if I’d made a mistake in the submission process or developer paperwork. After four weeks, I got a rejection, under the clause “6.4 Apple and our customers place a high value on simple, refined, creative, well thought through interfaces. They take more work but are worth it. Apple sets a high bar. If your user interface is complex or less than very good it may be rejected” with an elaboration that the menu buttons didn’t work. I responded that to move beyond the menu screen, click the flashing red buttons, just like on the first screen and every other front-end screen. I’m not claiming that the menu in question is an example of great interface design, but it’s taken from the original arcade game, is consistent with the rest of the game (if you remove those buttons, what are you going to do with all the other screens - leave it inconsistent and more confusing?), and really, it’s not that hard to figure out. The cited clause is one of the more obnoxious ones in the review guidelines - if you throw around phrases like “less than very good”, you’re asking for a backlash. It went back in review and after another week, I got these two reprimands - “Your app appears to be a mostly unmodified port of your iOS app HyperBowl.” and “The Mac OS environment significantly different from the iOS environment, and it is important that your app be a great app on Mac OS X. Multiple windows, windows that resize or go full screen, and control functionality for mouse and keyboard, are some of the many features customers expect in a Mac OS X app, and it’s important that your app look and work well in a Mac OS X environment.” I pointed out that the iOS version of HyperBowl is actually a port of the Mac version (if the Mac App Store had appeared for the iOS App Store, it would have appeared on the former first) but said I’d remove the entire front end, which they agreed was “advisable”. And these two objections are really lame - they are general enough to be meaningless, and they are irrelevant. Who cares what the iOS version looks like (and by the way, I have a use of the iOS version of HyperBowl who is incensed that it doesn’t have the shadows available in the Mac version). Would the objection disappear if I’d never made the iOS version? The second admonition sounds like they’re talking about a word-processing app (multiple windows?) and is badly written. Functionality for mouse and keyboard? Does that mean you can use one or the other, or that they both just have to do something. From the company that was The Word in user interface design (I still have the 1992 edition of the Human Interface Guidelines) this is embarrassing. I’d even say its “less than good.” Anyway, after removing fullscreen mode to avoid a bug reported in the next rejection (by the way, I’d say the bug reporting was “less than good”, also - I got a better report when I asked for specifics, but if I had reported the first one to Unity QA, I’m sure someone on that end would be muttering what a useless report that was), I got a fourth rejection repeating the bits about being an unmodified port of the iOS version and how everyone expects it to be a Mac app, so they suggested I add a fullscreen mode. I’m not a fan of fullscreen mode - it was prevalent for historic 3D performance reasons as far as I could tell, and with Unity it’s not easy to maintain the desired aspect ratio. Plus I would argue that it’s not good user interface design - when I tried it out to reproduce the 3rd rejection bug, I couldn’t remember the keyboard shortcut to switch back. In any case, I was getting annoyed with the repeated quotes about being an iOS port vs. Mac app and didn’t feel any confidence they’d reject it again for some other reason and repeat those quotes again, which might drive me to set my Mac on fire, so I decided to avail myself of the included link to the appeals board and make my feelings clear (without being profane). I noted with minor amusement that the link was broken (requires a little bit of editing) and the acknowledgment email thanked me for my interest in iOS apps (more “less than very good”), but was somewhat impressed they got back to me in a few days - a Developer Relations guy emailed me to call him the next day to explain the board’s decision. The personal touch was nice, but honestly, since they didn’t seem interested in my opinion or any debate, it would have saved me some phone tag if he just told me in the email. I thought they might say “add fullscreen” but actually he reported they didn’t feel like they could approve the app, it was “multipurposed” too much (they want an exclusive? I guess Tetris is out?), and he didn’t see any way to make it enough of a “Mac app” unless I “started from scratch”. Wow, I have to admit they managed to surprise me. But I’m glad they didn’t string me along - if I’d added fullscreen, tracked down whatever cursor bug they found and then got rejected again…who knows, I might have done something crazy like start programming XNA games. Now, there’s no way I’m going to chance going through this again with another submission, so I’d considered asking for a refund of that $99, but while all this was going on, the much, much simpler [Fugu Maze](http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/fugu-maze/id426993175?mt=12) (which also has an [iOS version](http://itunes.apple.com/app/fugu-maze/id295808255?mt=8)) got approved without ado. Go figure. It’s getting a few dollars a day, so I suppose if I just let it sit there and otherwise ignore the Mac App Store, I’ll make my money back and perhaps a bit of profit. I guess that’s a business model. Now, back to my regular iOS programming.
