---
layout: post
title: ReLinkedIn
date: '2011-06-30T13:17:16-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110515728481/relinkedin
---
As you might notice on my sidebar, I’m (back) on LinkedIn. I tried it way back when they were in beta and mostly popular among programmers. I liked having an online resume and the degrees-of-separation angle was fun, but I was leery of the social networking angle (there are some past coworkers and bosses with whom I’d like to maintain those degrees of separation) and didn’t think it was all that useful. It seemed to me that the most active networkers would be the least useful to network with. Recent LinkedIn invitations from recruiters and salespeople seemed to confirm that opinion (one salesperson lost some of my paperwork, terminated my support account without telling me, and then invited me into his LinkedIn network).

But now due to peer pressure (seems like everyone I know is on it), or perhaps I’m swayed by their recent IPO with a dot-com bubblish valuation (last chance to try it before the party’s over), or maybe now I’m in that category of desperate networker, I’m back in. It doesn’t seem all that different from what I remember. I still like the online resume (I’d been musing about some kind of online/mobile resume application, so I can make one of those feeble “I thought of that!” claims), but I wish I hadn’t tried the import-resume feature. I spent more time fixing up the garbled results than it would have taken to type it in from scratch. I’m more appreciative of the networking feature now, maybe since it’s been enough time I’ve lost track of some people and it’s interesting to see where they work now (turns out I have a couple of friends at Zynga - remember me when you cash in on that impending IPO!), and now that I’m on Facebook (also belatedly), I see the value of having a professional vs. friends network.

Also from Facebook, I see that social networking companies each have their core competencies and it’s best not to waste a lot of time on their attempts to be the all-in-one web within the web, as Facebook has with their systems for answer (replacing Quora), wiki (replacing, literally copying, wikipedia) and resumes (replacing LinkedIn). With LinkedIn, I ended up deactivating the twitter feed - if someone comments on it, chances are I won’t see it, it doesn’t show up in my twitter account, and the whole thing clutters up the update panel (oops, I almost said “Facebook wall”). Likewise, I went into Settings and turned off my activity broadcast, so everyone doesn’t have to see every little change I make to my profile. And that’s where I realized the default setting displays your identity when you view other profiles (a rather Facebookish privacy-less default), so I turned that off, at the expense of not seeing the identities of others who view you (a “so there!” disincentive). That’s OK with me - it seems a bit stalkerish.

Another problem is that each additional social network is like taking another part-time (or full-time?) job. Working for the man, or rather, the internet. I killed much of yesterday setting up my account, experimenting with the features, sending out invites, responding to responses to my invites, adding links and badges to my profile on my other web sites (by the way, take advantage of the URL customization feature - I got dibs on “philchu” even though there’s a heap of Philip Chu’s out there. I guess most people don’t bother). Now I feel I’m out of gas - back to work…real work!

