---
layout: post
title: Mac, How I Missed You
date: '2011-10-08T20:00:17-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110515764016/mac-how-i-missed-you
---
_Originally written on Epinions in June 2005:_

The Mac was my first love. Sure, I was first introduced to the TRS-80 back in junior high, and I had some good times with the Apple II in high school. But that summer before I went to college, when I saw the Mac sporting the same variety of scalable fonts and pretty icons as her elder sister Lisa, I knew she was the one for me.

And after dallying with sophisticated but high-maintenance Lisp and Unix workstations in college, I tried to go back to the Mac, but it just wasn’t the same - the bulky Macintosh II, the schizophrenic Mac with the DOS card, and the ever more erratic iterations of the Mac OS 7/8/9 left me thinking I was holding onto something that maybe was never there.

So, after slumming the past several years with Windows PC’s, wondering if that was the best I could do, I saw the Mac Mini and thought, maybe I’ll give it one more shot. And indeed the petite Mini is intended to lure Windows users to the Apple fold - with a footprint just slightly larger than a DVD and standing only an inch and a half high, the Mini does not include a mouse, keyboard and monitor like other Mac’s. Rather, it is intended to allow Windows users to cross over by unplugging their PC monitor and USB mouse and keyboard and plugging them into the Mini.

I don’t know if Mini buyers are really doing that, but it works for me. I have multiple computers sharing a monitor via a low-priced Linksys kvm switch, and connecting my Mini to it via the supplied SVGA adapter works fine most of the time (occasionally the screen blanks out and I have to switch away and back to get it going again). For the keyboard and mouse, I repurposed the Sony keyboard that came with my PS2/Linux kit and a Logitech cordless mouse that I’d been using with my Windows XP system. (A Targus notebook mouse also worked fine).

At $599 for the 1.4GHz processor 80MB hard drive configuration and $499 for 1.2 GHz and a 40MB hard drive, the Mac Mini is priced within range of comparably equipped Windows PC’s. I opted to spend the extra hundred, reasoning it’s worth it just for the additional hard drive space (after installation, I was already down to 65MB and couldn’t install the full Fink open-source package - I’ll probably use the single Firewire port for another hard drive). And factoring in the cost of an Apple keyboard, mouse and monitor, the Mini seems favorably priced compared to other Macintosh models.

Still, I feel Apple is a bit stingy with the RAM - 512MB seems to be the standard these days, while the Mini comes with 256MB, and this becomes noticeable as you launch several programs and watch the mouse cursor spin. The reps at the Apple Store and CompUSA informed me that it’s best to order a custom configuration online if you want more, since opening and adding to the Mini is a non-trivial operation. This also goes if you want to burn DVD’s with a SuperDrive in your Mini - it only comes standard with the Combo drive (burning CD’s is a cinch, just drag files over, then select “Burn” from the right-click menu, but I did get confused the first time and ended up burning an empty disk). The Mini doesn’t come with Bluetooth or the Airport WiFi support, either. There’s only one USB port, so I expect almost everyone will end up attaching a USB hub.

Apple apparently trimmed costs on the installation software, too. While reading **Mac OS X Panther for Unix Geeks** and perusing open source software, I’ve seen instructions on installing developer tools from Disk 3 of the Mac OS X 10.3 distribution, but the packaging only contains Disk 1 (I still don’t know what’s on Disk 2). In my impatience, I bought my Mini a couple of weeks before OS X 10.4 (Tiger) came out, but it came with a $10 OS X 10.4 upgrade form, and the upgrade arrived within three weeks ( I was disappointed to see it again only had one disk but it did include developer tools and the X11 window system). By the way, I hear that units are still shipping with OS X 10.3.

The installation process is a breeze, but requires you to enter personal information, including a phone number, and the Apple privacy policy is opt-out. How enlightened. At least it’s consistent - I registered on the Apple Developer Connection web site and started receiving reminders about the Tiger release date and heavy HTML email’s that enclosed a personal invitation from Steve Jobs to attend the next developer conference. The opt-out process isn’t easy, either - I had to check the FAQ and then submit a support request explicitly requesting the opt-out and identifying which particular messages I didn’t want to receive. MacWorld is on the bandwagon, too - after registering for the free six-month subscription that came with the Mini, I immediately started receiving their junk email.

The purchase experience at CompUSA was excruciating (after repeatedly declining to buy the AppleCare protection plan, I spent half an hour watching the salesperson hunt-and-peck on an antiquated terminal), and after hearing my brother’s problems on getting warranty service on his Mac, I have little confidence in Apple’s tech support, but so far everything is running smoothly, and I’m still in the honeymoon phase with my new Mac. I was delighted to find that I could just drag my Linux files over via Windows file sharing and Samba, and, since the Mac OS is based on Unix (BSD, a cousin to Linux), even more delighted to discover my Java-based web content creation pipeline runs without alteration from the Terminal window.

Steve Jobs may be a jerk, but he’s sure got taste - the Mac desktop is as good-looking as it’s ever been and is an attractive change from Windows (though it’s not quite as intuitive as the simpler classic Mac OS and doesn’t provide complete access to the new sophistication underneath, e.g. it’s easy to turn on the built-in FTP server, but not obvious how to administer FTP accounts), the computer itself is aesthetically pleasing in all details ranging from the silver and white color to the rounded corners and even the tiny glowing power indicator, and even the packaging inside the original cardboard box with handle is beautifully arranged. You know, maybe we can make it work this time.

