---
layout: post
title: The Unfine Print, or Double Indemnity
date: '2011-06-02T04:17:15-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110515718101/the-unfine-print-or-double-indemnity
---
When I tried out AppViz 2 today, at first I thought the new iAd revenue tracking wasn’t working. Turns out it was the usual Apple you-have-login-and-agree-to-agree-to-the-new-agreement deal. Now, this reminds me of some of my peeves signing contracts as a contractor. I had one client that kept giving me new paperwork to sign, putting me at increasing liability for this and that, after I agreed to work for them and signed all the initial paperwork. All the developer and iTunes agreement revisions make that client seem restrained and considerate. I’ve already paid my $99 yearly developer fee, spent all that money on development hardware and software and marketing, not to mention time - do I really have a choice on signing whatever they give me? Same goes for consumers - are they going to not sign a revised iTunes agreement after buying an iPhone or iPad? Then they’d have to use their iPhone as just, gasp, a phone.

It’s doubtful whether anyone actually reads the entire agreement anyway (42 pages? Shouldn’t that violate an Apple Human Interface Guideline?) It seems to me that a EULA should fit on the back of a retail software box - then it could actually be printed there instead of requiring that you agree to whatever legal statement is inside the box when you purchase it (didn’t realize buying a game at Best Buy is so sinister, did you?) And when presented with a revised agreement, the least they could do is identify the revisions. The first time I negotiated a contract with a game publisher, their producer kept sending me back the contract without telling me what they’d changed (like surreptitiously raising the number of hours I was committing to them). I figured that company was just sleazy&nbsp; (they were a game publisher, after all). Then I negotiated a contract with a large game developer, and their lawyer did the same thing. So I figured, well, the game industry sucks. But I guess everyone does it (so, hey, you all suck). The only attempts I’ve seen from tech companies to make their legalese understandable is from Vimeo, which actually provides clear English explanations of their Terms of Service, and Goodreads, which at least pointed to a copy of their previous Terms of Service for comparison when they introduced a new one.

The problem I had with the revised Goodreads TOS was the addition of a very general indemnification clause, which makes you responsible for any legal costs incurred to the provider by your use of the service (if you don’t believe me, check the [Vimeo explanation](http://vimeo.com/terms)). This is common (like Goodreads told me when I complained), but not everyone has it, including tripadvisor, and twitter and Facebook (which is what I told them), and it seems like those clauses mean if an author sues Goodreads for a critical review written by your or Google gets sued for click fraud involving your ad or your site or even someone using your account, you’re technically responsible for their legal costs. So when I’m in a position to negotiate a contract, I just insist the clause goes both ways, which is waht I usually see in a contract between two companies. Then it might actually be beneficial. I bet all those iOS developers getting sued by Lodsys wish the Apple developer agreement had an indemnification clause going their way.

