---
layout: post
title: The Pompous Meddler's Tale
date: '2011-06-05T15:40:13-07:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110515718871/the-pompous-meddlers-tale
---
I worked my way halfway through Richard Dawkins’ [The Ancestor’s Tale](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ancestor%27s_Tale) and found it an entertaining read until I ran into his footnote complaining about the “pompous meddling” in the English language that brought us revisions such as “Beijing”, “Mumbai” and “cosmonaut”.&nbsp; This is a pretty weird gripe from someone who seems to take an amused view of heated taxonomic nomenclature debates, but it’s not the first time I’ve heard a Briton get his hackles up over the demise of “Bombay”.

Now, first of all, it’s actually pronounced “Mumbai”, or at least a whole lot closer, by Indians, as “Beijing” is just about right, compared to “Peking”. That’s a good thing - I’m sure if foreigners in London insisted on calling the city something like “lantern” or “lowdown” and said “hey, don’t mess with our language” when corrected, that wouldn’t sit well with the locals. Second, making up a spelling based on a lousy pronunciation because you couldn’t be bothered to learn the original correctly and then expecting the world to use your new mispronunciation - that constitutes lazy work and “pompous meddling”.

The new spellings aren’t just better as a matter of political correctness. I still say “Peking duck” because that’s the way it’s spelled, but I say “Beijing” because that’s the way it’s spelled (now) and so now I’m actually the latter more or less correctly. And by correctly, I mean when I say it to someone who’s Chinese they’ll know what city I’m talking about (this could be handy if I ever visit China). I still wince when I say “dim sum” to someone who’s Chinese, because I know it’s pronounced more like “deem sum” but for some reason I feel compelled to say it the way I visualize it spelled. On the other hand “deem sum” is actually Cantonese, the language of Hong Kong which is famed for dim sum. The Mandarin for dim sum is “dian xin” and if I had to start saying that, it would sound even more wrong to me, since I grew up listening to Cantonese (Which reminds me, I had a British coworker who, when I mentioned my parents grew up in Hong Kong, responded how “we civilized that place”. You know, the empire is over. Get used to it and move on. And by the way, Hong Kong is actually more like “Herng Gong” in Cantonese, so thanks for mangling that, too).

Anyway, there are plenty of English language misuses that bother me more than how foreign capitols are spelled (or is it capital? Now I’m doing it) Like principle instead of principal (saw that in a recent Gamasutra news article) Or irregardless instead of regardless (bunch of white guys on C-Span2 complaining about the illiteracy of illegal immigrants) Or misnomer used for misconception (by sports commentators, along with bountiful employment of “thus far”).

Irregardless of any misnomers encountered thus far as a matter of principal. Back to the British. It really bothers me to hear object-oriented programming termed “object-orientated” programming (object-oriented programming has come under enough attack lately). And aluminum pronounced “aluminium”. [World Wide Worlds](http://www.worldwidewords.org/index.htm), an informative site about “international English from a British viewpoint”, explains how terms like “orientated” and “aluminium” diverged from and in some cases predate the American English equivalents and how both variations are legitimate depending on context (or location). But I don’t care how legitimate it is, I’ll just call that pompous meddling.

