---
layout: post
title: I Can't Stop Talking About Greenlight
date: '2012-09-06T21:04:27-07:00'
tags:
- steam
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110612438051/i-cant-stop-talking-about-greenlight
---
The weird thing about this recent Valve/Steam/Greenlight kerfuffle is that I have little interest in it, but I got caught up in it. I’m not even that familiar with Steam - I know what it is, I downloaded Portal, I submitted HyperBowl to Steam and in a few weeks got a thanks-but-sorry-and-we-won’t-tell-you-why, but it was no big deal. I wasted a lot more time trying to get HyperBowl on the Mac App Store - they kept rejecting me for this and that until I finally complained to the appeal board and they told me it looked too much like the iOS version and I should start over from the ground up. So I focus on mobile and give the desktop version away for free (just enough to incur a support burden).

And actually, $100 is not bad a for a one-time fee, compared to the recurring Apple $99 fee (and that’s one annual fee for iOS and another for Mac), although it’s a bit of an apples-and-oranges comparison (you’re paying a popularity contest entry fee) plus it goes to charity. Even when it looked like it might be a per-submission fee (they cleared that up now, but more and more I’m getting the impression they’re just winging it), the charity aspect would seem to make it a worthy expense, if you could afford it. Whether or not people can afford it, there are certain to be complaints, of course - look at all those Unity Indie owners who don’t understand why they can’t have Pro features (or that dude on YouTube who complained “I’m not made of a million bucks!” when I said I might charge for my game).

But what got my dander up was the reaction to the reaction, basically “You don’t have $100, what’s wrong with you?”, “Steam is for pro’s, if you’re not a funded team making a AAA game go away” and “What’s the big deal, you’ll make a ton of money on it.” I can think of a lot of responses, which have already been made by a bunch of people by now, but the short of it is, if you’re saying stuff like this, you’re probably not an unsalaried game developer (it actually reminds me of the time a coworker asked me why poor people eat at McDonald’s as we finished our $15 Thai meal), and don’t you have a scrum meeting to go to? If Valve wanted more AAA games, an American Idol type of competition (without the expert panel) is not the way to go about it - remember, they said they instituted the fee to eliminate the joke submissions, not indie non-AAA submissions. Everyone who’s projecting their hoighty-toighty standards, get off your high horse, and keep your bewailing-quality comments on gamasutra. And that gold-mine stuff - already went through that with the App Store. Which reminds me, why am I still talking about this? I have an iOS build to finish.

