---
layout: post
title: For Once, I Agree with Skip Bayless
date: '2012-02-22T19:47:39-08:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110515830376/for-once-i-agree-with-skip-bayless
---
I was watching ESPN’s First Take yesterday morning and, this is something I rarely say, I agree with what Skip Bayless was saying. Specifically, in the discussion of racial sensitivity and the recent “chink in the armor” quotes near and around Jeremy Lin, Bayless opined that it’s better to be oversensitive than undersensitive, or something like that. And he supported that by offering that he’s from Oklahoma and it bothers him to no end when he hears the term “Okie”.

That is an excellent example. I really had no idea until that moment that anyone would find that offensive, and my first reaction upon hearing that someone’s offended might be “why?” and “that makes no sense” and “you shouldn’t be offended”. But if I’d put any thought into it, it might have occurred to me, and in any case it’s not for me to say whether someone should be offended. There’s this thing called politeness (in the Internet age where you can be a jackass with impunity, that might be an alien concept, but look it up in Wikipedia). Politeness is really a much better term than political correctness. And maturity. I’m certainly more careful about how I talk now, but I remember offending in the past - for example one coworker was from the South and didn’t appreciate hearing references to “rednecks”, another was irritated that I assumed he wanted to eat BBQ all the time, and I’ve made at least one too many bald jokes (and I’m on my way to becoming the receiving end of those).

It should be easier to empathize if you’ve been on the receiving end, and almost everyone has in some respect, but you have to be able to make the connection. I had a neighbor who confided that while in Hawaii he was given a hard time by native Hawaiians, yet then he launched into the typical Southern California diatribe against the invading Mexicans and how political correctness was limiting his ability to “tell it like it is.” So much for walking in another man’s shoes. Or woman’s. It still amazes me that Geraldine Ferraro would justly cite sexism as a constant challenge in her political career and then say Barack Obama faced not racism but “racial resentment”.

I confess it’s a process for me, too - more than once I’ve thought that it’s silly for people to complain about the word “niggardly”, since it’s a perfectly innocent word that has no relation to that other word, and I don’t like to see the English language chipped away. But English has survived worse threats (like sports journalists saying “irregrdless” all the time, that drives me crazy), and the reaction doesn’t have to make sense. It just is. I wince every time I hear the phrase “chink in the armor” even though I know (most of the time) the use of the phrase is innocent and technically there’s nothing wrong it. I can’t even remember if the “c word” has been ever directed at me. I have been on the receiving end of a few racial slurs in my life but I don’t remember which ones they are (more commonly, I get friendly questions about my nationality, where am I really from, here’s a pamphlet for an ESL course, and welcome to America!) I’ve probably more often heard “chink” and “chinaman” in movies (thank you Shanghai Noon, you might be the reason why a local grade-schooler called me a chinaman while I was jogging by - there’s a debate over whether T-Mobile can install a cell tower by that school, and I’m voting for it). But just knowing they’re racial slurs (I guess you could say I’ve been programmed) is enough to provoke a knee jerk reaction.

Which leads me to believe the guy who just got fired for penning the “Chink in the Armor” headline deserves it. If I had seen the headline before the furor about it, I would have immediately assumed it was a sophomoric attempt at humor, in the same vein as the sports “journalist” who tweeted a joke about Jeremy Lin’s penis size. But at least the tweeter confessed it was a lame joke - the headline writer claims he didn’t know that word was a slur. So I think it’s justified to fire him for being a bald-faced liar and not manning up. Or, if he’s actually truthful, he should be fired and not allowed any near any media since he’s incredibly clueless.

I did see the on-air utterance of phrase by the journalist who was suspended, and I thought he meant no harm by it, and I did wince anyway, and I did think maybe he realized what he said right after he said it and tried to poker face it away. In his later apology, he mentioned his wife was Asian, and that doesn’t really make me feel better (it reminds me of my dormmate in college who was bragging about dating an Asian girl and much better-looking white guys were than Asian guys - hello, standing right here!)

Anyway, I can’t imagine that his wife would have used the phrase, and therein lies the best defense against these situations - if there were any Asian-Americans in the studio or press room (not just Asians, you could probably go over to China and insult the hell out of people there without them recognizing you’re using racial slurs - hey, I’ve got an idea for a travel package promo! Call it the “racial resentment” tour) then the jokes seem less funny and the bad headlines are less likely to make it to print. But right now I see more Asian-Americans in the NBA than on ESPN. And this is still a country that has a top sports franchise called the Redskins.

