---
layout: post
title: Hot Pot
date: '2014-12-08T07:00:32-08:00'
tags: []
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/110698077801/hot-pot
---
During my consulting stint in Hong Kong, my after-work activity was trying to figure out how to order food. Some travelers make a point of seeing the historic and cultural sites. Me, I check out the food court. Even in Hong Kong, that can be a challenge if you’re out where the regular folks live.

Mostly, I did alright, but there was just one time I was pretty unhappy with my meal, when I tried a hot pot place in a mall. I walked in because it said dim sum out front, but I guess that late they don’t serve dim sum. Their English was almost as bad as my Chinese, and I think they assumed I was Japanese (for some reason, most people in Hong Kong thought I was Japanese).

I don’t know if that had anything to do with them recommending too many dishes (the expensive ones) and delivering dishes I didn’t order, but that got me increasingly annoyed while I was eating, and I could have really used a warning like, “Careful with that stuff that looks like balls of fish - it is balls of fish, but filled with burning hot cheese.” I’m not kidding, the next few days I had a burn scar following the line of cheese-lava dribbling down my chin.

I’ve never really understood the appeal of hot pot restaurants. I go out to avoid cooking. Having a stove on the dinner table is the opposite of what I’m going for. But maybe if I knew what I was doing…this video explains a lot.

