---
layout: post
title: Corona
date: '2015-03-08T16:31:29-07:00'
tags:
- corona
- app
- ios
- android
- unity
- programming
tumblr_url: https://fugugames.tumblr.com/post/113097255081/corona
---
Obscured by the GDC free-engine announcements from Unity and Epic, Corona is now also free, so I played around with it a bit this past week. It’s strength is in 2D games but it’s also appealing as a cross-platform app solution (I’ve given up on Xamarin Forms for now). Programming in Lua doesn’t have the practicality of the C# code-sharing arrangement I have with Xamarin and Unity, but it is kind of cool, and the code is succinct.

If you’re used to the nice build-and-run of Unity and Xamarin, the build-and-manually-install of Corona is a little inconvenient. A bigger problem is that building to Android fails on my Mac with a popup saying I need to downgrade to Java 6, even though I’ve been running Java 8 with Android dev with no problems.They do have public daily builds, which is really cool, so maybe that’s a change in the works. Another inconvenience, which is probably intended to be a convenience: the iOS bundle ID is derived from the provisioning profile, so you can’t use profiles with wildcard IDs. I would happily type in an extra lua table value (which is how the other build parameters are set) in order to avoid a trip to the Apple developer site.

So for now, I think I’ll stick with my current Xamarin, &nbsp;Unity and maybe a bit of Swift setup. But my Xamarin subscription runs out in a few months, so maybe then…

